---
title: "Flying V"
date: 2018-07-03T00:00:00+02:00
layout: post
thumbnail: "/assets/img/projects/flying-v/guitar.jpg"
description: "The Famous Gibson Flying V — now DIY."
categories: projects woodworking
---

Given my musical interests, I enjoy electrical guitars, and instruments in
general. As I've never had a humbucker set-up guitar and I couldn't afford one
myself, I decided to make one myself. I thought it would be a great idea to
actually learn some woodworking, since all of my woodworking experience prior
to this was minor. Given that my father has already made two electrics guitar,
I asked him to help me build it, but to teach me, rather than making it
himself.

![Guitar](/assets/img/projects/flying-v/guitar.jpg)

## Design

Since I enjoy metal, I wanted to have a metal guitar, but I also wanted it to
be somewhat subtle. Given that I always enjoyed the Flying V, I decided to make
the Gibson Flying V, as I find it to be a tame creature. The design is
conventionally aggressive, but still tame and with soft edges. To my fathers
advice, I decided not to put the electronics in the front, but at the back, so
that there would be no distracting pickguard, which with the black lacquer,
turned out to be a beautiful guitar.

![Albert King with his
Lucy](https://memphisrocknsoul.files.wordpress.com/2014/02/albertkingalbertking02.jpg)

I decided to opt for a Floyd Rose bridge, considering the music I wanted to
play.

## Construction

### Humbuckers

The first piece of the puzzle was to make the humbucker pickups, as they are
central piece of the electric guitar. I wanted a very special tone. I enjoyed
[Dimebag Darrel](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dimebag_Darrell)'s tone very
much. Some basic research showed that he used the following two pickups:

* A custom [Dimebucker](https://www.seymourduncan.com/pickup/dimebucker) pickup
  in the bridge position
* A PAF<sup>1</sup> ['59
  Bridge](https://www.seymourduncan.com/pickup/59-bridge) pickup in the neck
position

It is interesting that he is using the classic PAF bridge pickup in the neck
position. This allows for some very aggressive articulate solos, yet also full,
clear low-ends. The mids are, of course, scooped, but in the neck position, the
scooped mids are somewhat reduced.

The custom Dimebucker is the more interesting of the two. The ceramic magnet
creates a very strong magnetic field - responding to higher frequencies better,
making it sound hotter. These all add to creating a very crunchy tone,
something Dimebag was famous for. The overwound pickup of 16kΩ has an extremely
high passive output gain - excellent for some very heavy blues, hard rock and
metal.

I ordered the components of off [ebay](https://www.ebay.com) - a pickup kit,
some 42AWG wire and ceramic magnets. The ceramic magnets that arrived were
completely out of proportion, so I had to stick with the magnets that I got in
the kit - 2 AlNiCo magnets. I decided to scrap the idea of making the
Dimebucker and make two PAF-style classic pickups.

The pickup kit was a mess - missing holes, cheap plastic, oversized polepieces
which broke the bobbin, overall bad craftmanship. Nonetheless, I prevailed.
Using my [pickup winder](/projects/pickup-winder), I managed to wind both
humbuckers to around 12kΩ DCR both. 

I did wax them in paraffin for about half an hour each, which mildly rectified
some issues with the bobbin, filling the cracks in the plastic up, and getting
rid of the extra air in the pickups.

### The body

The body was the easiest part to construct. I got two pieces of wood which I
glued together. This was then cut using a table cutter, roughly and, then,
using a custom tool which is basically a motorized axis with sanding paper
being wrapped around the axis, it was sanded down to a better precision. The
straight edges were sanded down with a belt sander. A handheld milling machine
was used to mill out the body for the wholes for the pickups, the bridge and
the electronics in the back.

![The construction of the body](/assets/img/projects/flying-v/body-construction.jpg)

### The neck

I made the neck out of the remaining wood. The table saw helped a lot, but the
majority of the work was done manually. I used a block plane to cut the flat
piece of the neck out (the heel), rasps to roughly shape the neck out, and
spokeshaves to smoothen the rough texture after the rasps. Then, a lot of
sanding proceeded to finish the shape of the neck out. 

![The construction of the neck](/assets/img/projects/flying-v/neck-construction.jpg)

### The Fingerboard

I decided not to construct the fingerboard myself, as I didn't trust myself
with the precision required, considering that this was my first major
woodworking job. I did have to push the frets myself, but these were somewhat
easy to do, considering the workshop I worked at had a manual hydraulic press.

### The bridge

The bridge was quite easy to put in. The milling machine did a lot of work for
me. The locking nut also saved me a lot of work, as I didn't have to make the
nut by hand.

### Lacquering and polishing

After sanding the guitar down, I brought it to a lacquerer's place. He
lacquered it for me, although somewhat poorly. This was rectified by lacquering
multiple times as well as sanding the lacquer between every coating of lacquer.

![The sanding before the lacquering](/assets/img/projects/flying-v/polishing.jpg)

Polishing was a very long and monotonous process. Using some very fine
sandpaper and a ROCS, the guitar was polished. Although the ROCS helped out
immensely, a lot of polishing was done by hand.

## Future Plans

At the moment there are a few issues with the guitar which I plan on
rectifying.

### Bridge

The Floyd Rose isn't settled properly. The 3 springs holding it in balance
become a bit stuck on the wood at the back, as it isn't milled deeply enough.

### Humbuckers

Although I am extremely satisfied with the sound of the humbuckers, I would
like to experiment with ceramic magnets and high DC resistance of the windings.

### Tuning pegs

The tuning pegs currently used are the cheapest ones available. They should be
replaced by more high quality tuning pegs.

## Thank you

I'd just like to sincerely thank two very important people to this small
project - my [father](https://www.dragovejnovic.com), and Mr. [Zoran
Kuvac](https://www.guitarsalon.com/store/p4742-2015-zoran-kuvac-cdar.html), an
extremely good and knowledgeable classical guitar luthier. Mr. Zoran Kuvac was
the one who enabled me to work in his workshop, and has, alongside my father,
taught me many things about woodworking.

## Footnotes

<sup>1</sup>Patent Applied For
